There's a third piece here,
which is computed values.
So far, we actually have
basically everything we need for
a basic reactive system, but the nuance or
the real control comes in with this third
primitive, which I call derivations.
They're sometimes called memos or
computeds.
And this thing is basically
both an observer and a signal.
It only recalculates when
the values it depends on changes.
So like the effect,
it only reruns its function body
if something inside of it changes.
When you just access it from the outside,
you'll always get the same value back.
However, this sort of intermediate
caching is very powerful.
I'm just gonna show the syntaxctualy
what this work looks like here where we
basically have a couple names
like John and Smith for
our signals and
then I've created a memo for full name.
This is usually a pretty canonical
example where we're just calculating full
name from first name and last name.
And then I've actually got an effect
here to console log our full name.
And essentially, setting the first name
to Will, will also update our effect.
This is kind of unsurprising perhaps,
but it's basically so
that it causes a bit of a change.
So if you set the first name to Will, it
actually causes this memo to recalculate,
which gives us a new first name and
last name,
which causes the effect to calculate.
There's a ripple effect as the change
propagates through the system.
And as I said, this example is so
trivial you'd probably be like,
why do I even care about this?
This can be important if you need
to cache expensive calculations,
especially if they're used
in more than one place.
For me, getting back to my kinda
spreadsheet thinking, this is when I'm
thinking about calculating tax and
tip and stuff off a single subtotal.
You don't wanna do the math over and
over again, you just wanna kinda like
get to a certain point and be like,
okay, I've calculated the subtotal,
gonna cash this value, tips calculated
off of it, tax calculated off of it.
You can also think of it sometimes like
if you've ever seen a user interface when
there's an avatar in the corner,
sometimes it's a letter, let's say for
your first name if you
don't have a picture.
That's an example of something derived
off your first name, essentially.
So you only need to calculate that
once unless your name changes,
you're not gonna recalculate that avatar.
So you might use it in multiple
places in the UI though.
So these are kind of examples of this.
Basically, I'd like to say what
could be derived should be derived.
That's kind of the principle that we
have behind how to write stuff with
reactivity and with Solid.
And because this largely removes
the potential of getting out of sync.
This typically when you write code,
though, requires little bookkeeping,
because if you had to manage all those
assignments and updates yourself,
it gets kinda complicated.
But luckily for us, reactive
systems handle this automatically.
And I've got a couple more examples
where I actually wanna kind of
illustrate the difference here.
I've got a bit of an example here
where I've taken our first name and
last name example.
And instead of using the memo or
create memo or
the duration I showed before,
I've just made it a function call.
Why didn't make it a function call?
Cuz I wanna still call
it under our effect,
I want our effect to still track it,
so I've made it a function call.
And I've made two effects now,
I've made an effect that says my name is
full name and your name is not full name.
And then at the end here, I update
the name to kinda show you the difference.
And again,
we start by creating our signals.
We create our reaction now, that
happens when we run our two effects and
you'll immediately see that it calls
creating or updating full name,
which is this little thing that I put
in the top of our full name function.
And the reason it calls out immediately
is because when it calls full name inside
this effect, it essentially is just
running this function again and again.
So we see creating updating full name, my
name is John Smith, creating updating full
name, your name is not John Smith because
it just calls the function twice.
Then when we update our name,
it's the same thing again
creating updating full name,
my name is Jacob Smith, creating updating
full name, your name is not Jacob Smith.
And the key difference here
when we do something that
we're using derivations is
that if I change this now to
be create memo and
wrap this function call and import it.
What runs actually becomes a lot shorter
because now this is eager
the way that it works in Solid.
But now when we create our signals,
we actually create our memo up here and
it basically creates or
updates the full name up top.
But you can see when we run our effects,
it doesn't actually run this function
again it literally just reads it.
It goes, my name is John Smith,
your name is not John Smith.
We got rid of that kind of extra overhead.
And then similarly now when we
change the name on step three,
we see that it updates the full name, but
then again both effects run and
we've reduced the execution.
This is just kind of why
we would drive stuff.
Obviously, concatenate strings is not
very expensive operation and you probably
would be like, who cares but you can
picture things that are more expensive.
Very kind of the fundamentals look,
look at this.
>> So without registering in effects
nothing's reacting to the signal,
it's just kind of changing into the void.
>> Ideally, that's probably the case,
in the case of Solid,
our stuff actually is eager.
And this does depend differently
on different reactive systems.
This is something that we're exploring,
the eagerness of these
derivations in Solid are important for
the way our rendering works today,
but I think it's something that
we could look at in the future.
Theoretically, yes, we could just not
do it, but in Solid actually, as soon
as you have one of these derived values,
it does start calculating stuff eagerly.